I'm Richard, I am the creator of
the Roc Programming Language, and
I'm a full-time rust programmer for
Zed, make an awesome code editor.
And today,
we're going to talk all about compilers.
We got some instructions here to get set
up for the workshop, it's very simple.
It's basically clone the repo and you need
to have Node.js installed, that's it.
So, doesn't need to be a big rush,
you can probably just kind of do it
right before we start the exercises.
So back in the day, way, way back in
the day, before the time of compilers,
people used to program
computers like this.
These are people who are actually
programming that computer physically
by moving wires around.
This was considered to be less ergonomic
than what we do today by a considerable
margin, but it worked, I mean, it was a
way that you could convince the computer.
Convince the machine to make the ones and
zeros go in the place that you want it to
by physically moving these cables around.
This is the 1946 ENIAC computer or ENIAC,
I've heard it pronounced both ways,
I like ENIAC better,
at University of Pennsylvania,
which is actually walking
distance from my house.
Although, I haven't seen
the ENIAC in there [LAUGH].
And ENIAC stands for the electronic,
numerical, integrator, and computer.
So one of the big things that people used
to use these things for was just like
mathematical calculations, that was
kind of the bread and butter of them.
And importantly,
there was this concept then, and
there still is this concept
now of machine instructions.
So the way that these programmers were
giving the machine its instructions were
by moving things around.
And the way that we typically give
machines their instructions these days
is not so manual, but rather we have
a compiler generate those machine
instructions, sometimes with several
layers of indirection in between.
So if you zoom all the way out
of what is a compiler's job,
basically what people typically mean when
they say compiler is you've got your
source code representation and
you've got your compiler in between that.
And then the machine instructions
come out the other side.
You run the compiler on the source, and
what you get out the other side are ones
and zeros, machine instructions, and
that is much more ergonomic
than the 1946 way of doing it.
C is a great classic example of
a compiler, we just did a workshop on C,
if you wanna learn about C,
this is not a course about C, though.
Rust is another, good example,
famous of compilers,
I also do the Rust [LAUGH] course for
FrontendMasters.
And assembly also is a thing that
you could consider to be a compiler,
but most people actually would put that
in a separate category of assembler.
It's a little unclear, maybe it's kind of
a historical reason for this, but I mean,
fundamentally, it is taking
a source code representation and
turning it into machine instructions.
So I would personally put it in
the category of compiler, but
some people would say, no,
no, that's a different thing.
Debates maybe had.
Now, these are all things that people
would call ahead of time compilers,
which essentially means that you
turn the source representation into
the machine instructions before
you are even running your program.
It's like that is the head of time,
ahead of run time,
transformation that
these compilers all do.
You also have sort of a runtime
transformation, where you're like,
as you're running your program, it is
on the fly turning your source code or
some intermediate representation of
that into machine instructions while
the program is still running.
And this is usually what people
mean when they say interpreter.
That's basically the fundamental
difference between a compiler or
interpreter is, whether a compiler is
ahead of time turning your source code
into machine instructions.
Or some other intermediate representation,
whereas an interpreter is doing
that same thing at runtime.
So shell scripts, classic example of
runtime, like interpreted languages.
JavaScript is an interpreted language, but
there's a little bit of a wrinkle there.
So JavaScript, in addition to having
a runtime interpreter has a just in-time
compiler, or JIT compiler, for short.
So a lot of interpreted languages do this.
And basically, the reason for
it is essentially performance.
If you've got a loop that's running in
JavaScript, last I checked the cut off in
V8 was like, if the loop is
running 4,000 iterations or more,
it sort of counts how many iterations
it's doing in the runtime interpreter.
And once it crosses the,
I think it's 4,000 iteration mark,
4,001 it's like,
okay this seems like a very long loop.
Maybe we should optimize this thing and
turn it into machine instructions,
rather than having to do the interpreter
thing every single iteration of this loop.
And they're kind of betting that
the extra work that they take to do that
translation at runtime into
machine instructions will pay off.
Because the remaining iterations
of the loop, they figure,
if there's 4,000 there's
probably another couple 1,000.
Then, okay, that'll pay for itself,
and it'll end up being faster than if
you just continue the entire
loop of the runtime interpreter.
So just in time, compilers have really
made a big difference in the performance
of a lot of interpreted languages, or
languages that originally
just interpreted.
To the point where pretty much every
popular runtime interpreted language these
days, maybe, except for
bash [LAUGH] now has a JIT.
So JavaScript does, Pearl does,
Ruby does, PHP, Python,
as far as I know,
all of those have JITs now.
Maybe not the main implementation,
but it certainly,
you can find an implementation
that has a JIT.
WebAssembly is an interesting
example of a language that only has
the just-in-time compiler.
So basically, WebAssembly is
designed to be sort of streamed,
like have streaming compilations.
So the idea is like your browser
wants to be able to execute this,
partially WebAssembly
has sandboxing features.
But also it's like a language where it
was designed from the get-go to be like,
you've got bytes coming
in over the network and
you're able to actually just-in-time go.
Compile those to machine code as
they are coming in off the network
before you have the entire program.
So everything has to be organized in a way
where you never need to wait and be like,
hang on, hang on, I can't continue until I
get some bytes at the end of the message,
it's like, no, no, streaming.
As it comes in, you're able to do
this just-in-time compilation.
That was one of the design
goals WebAssembly from Yego.
Now you also find compilers that will
compile from a source representation to
machine instructions by way of
some intermediate representation.
So one example of this is transpiler.
This is the term that people use when the
source representation and the intermediate
representation are both sort of intended
to be human readable languages.
So typescript compiler, tsc,
would be a perfect example of this
that's going from a human-readable,
human consumption language, namely
TypeScript, to compiling to JavaScript.
You will note, by the way,
that tsc is short for TypeScript compiler.
So it doesn't call itself tst,
it's not calling itself a transpiler,
it's calling itself a compiler.
This is another one of those
terms that is embattled.
Some people will say that,
no transpilers don't count as compilers
cuz they don't go to machine code or
other reasons, just like people will say
assemblers don't count as compilers.
I'm not taking a stance on this,
I'm just making
you aware of the controversy [LAUGH] in
case you see people argue about this.
The enemy representation
in this case is JavaScript.
And you can also have an IR interpreter.
So basically,
this is a browser Netscape, for example.
You can also have an IR compiler,
which was either a JIT one like V8, or
you could have an ahead of time compiler
that would take JavaScript code and
ahead of time compile it all
the way to machine code.
I'm not aware of any popular
tools that do this, but
I have seen some floating around GitHub
that will take JavaScript and give you
a statically compiled binary of ones and
zeros directly executable machine code.
But obviously, the interpreter for
that Netscape being an old school example,
obviously Chrome and Firefox,
SpiderMonkey, all those,
being more modern ones.
Now you also find bytecode compilers.
So, bytecode compilers are different
than transpilers, because bytecode is
an intermediate representation that
is not intended to be human-readable,
it's intended to be only machine readable.
So Java would be probably the most
popular example of really embracing this.
So Java has a source code format.java
files, and then it also has
a bytecode format, and that bytecode
format is intended to be portable.
So you can take your Java code,
compile it down to Java bytecode, and
you can take that Java bytecode and
run it on any different machine that
has the Java virtual machine on it.
This was what Java's original selling
point of write once run anywhere meant.
It was kind of,
compiler once run anywhere cuz, I mean,
you can write run Python anywhere as
the as long as I got Python installed.
It was more about the separating
out that compilation step,
where you don't have to give your
Java source code to everyone.
You can compile it down to this
bytecode and give them that, and
then they don't have to do the work
of compiling it on their machine.
Maybe there was also some, like,
this was back at a time when proprietary
wasn't the dirty word that it is now, but
maybe they'd like,
we can hide our source code, that's great.
So JVM bytecode, another famous IR,
and then the IR interpreter,
in that case would be
the Java virtual machine.
And an example of a just in
time compiler would be hotspot.
This is a famous Java compiler,
that was Bach and
his team developed to make Java
basically jittered and a lot faster.
And actually, that same team, because
they did such a good job on Hotspot,
Google hired them to go work on V8,
and they made V8 way faster,
which ended up sort of kicking
off a JavaScript performance war.
So that all came down to basically just
in time compilation of Java bytecode.
We are gonna do some WebAssembly
bytecode in this course.
And so, an example of a WebAssembly,
well, so
WebAssembly bytecode is like JVM bytecode.
It is just like ones and zeros.
It's not intended to be human-readable,
as we're gonna see in the last
section of this course.
It's basically just like, hey, we got
some bytes, they're arbitrary integers,
it was magic constants.
And we're gonna write
them to a specific part.
And then magically,
the browser or in our case,
Node.js is going to actually know what
to do with them and be able to run them.
Now, in this case, let's say you wanted
to run WebAssembly in the browser,
you could do that same thing, but
you do still need some sort of
source language to compile to that.
So in the case of Java bytecode, Java
would be an obvious language that compiles
the Java bytecode,
we talked about Kotlin earlier.
Kotlin also compiles the Java bytecode.
Lots of languages compile
to WebAssembly bytecode.
So C,
in addition to going to machine code,
has the option of compiling
to WebAssembly bytecode.
Rust is the same way,
you can take your Rust source code and
get out WebAssembly bytecode.
And in this course,
we are going to make something,
this spits out WebAssembly
bytecode directly.
We're also not gonna do any libraries, so
everything we're doing in this course is
just like, you get to see how
the entire sausage is made [LAUGH].
And in this case, that is what we're
compiling to is WebAssembly bytecode.
Of note, once you understand
compiling to WebAssembly bytecode,
I can say from experience that, the next
step to machine code is kind of just about
learning a different flavor
of a very similar thing.
There definitely are differences between
WebAssembly bytecode and machine code.
But fundamentally, there's a whole lot of
looking up magic integer constants and
figuring out where they go in the right
order to make the machine, or
in this case, the WebAssembly interpreter
understand what you're saying.